
APPLICATION: MORSE CODE.

Morse Code is a type of character encoding originally designed in the late 1830s by
Samuel Morse for use with his telegraph system. Morse Code allowed messages to
be transmitted long distances across telegraph wires and was extensively used by
the American railroad companies. It was first used in 1844 to transmit messages
between Washington and Baltimore. The original code used various patterns of
dots and spaces to represent the letters of the alphabet. While this was sufficient
for use in the United States, the code could not be used in Europe to transmit
non-English text, which contains diacritic marks. To remedy this shortcoming,
Friedrich Clemens Gerke improved on the original Morse Code and developed a
new version that was first used in 1848 to transmit messages in Germany. Gerke's
version of the code, with minor changes, was standardized in 1851 and became
known as American Morse Code.

The modern International Morse Code represents various letters, symbols, and
digits using sequences of dots ( or dits ), dashes ( or dahs ), short gaps, and long gaps.
The short gaps are used to break the sequence between letters and the long gaps
are used to separate words. The most famous is the sequence for SOS:
  ... --- ...

At this point, you might be wondering why we are discussing Morse Code and what
it has to do with binary trees. Suppose you are given the following sequence:
             - .-. . . ... .- .-. . ..-. ..- -.
and would like to know what it means. The most obvious way to decode this message is
to look through a table for each part of the sequence and find the corresponding letter.
When decoded, the message reads:

     TREES ARE FUN.

DECISION TREES.

Another way to translate the message is with the use of a decision tree. A decision
tree models a sequence of decisions or choices in which selections are made in
stages from among multiple alternatives at each stage. The stages in the decision
are represented as nodes while the branches indicate the decisions that can be
made at each stage.

A common use of the decision tree with which you should be familiar is the
dreaded automated phone menu. When the automated system answers your call, it
starts at the root of the tree and offers several choices from which you can choose.
After making your initial selection, you are presented with a submenu from which
you must make a second selection, and then possibly a third selection, and so on.
The presentation of the menu options by the automated system are the stages in
the decision and represented in the tree as nodes. The menu choices from which
you can select at each stage are indicated by branches from those nodes.

The same idea can be used to decode a Morse Code sequence. While each code
sequence is unique, they do not have unique prefixes. For example, the sequences
for the letters R and S both begin with a dot. To distinguish between the two, we
have to examine more of the sequence. The second symbol in the sequence for R
is a dash, while the sequence for S has a dot. It's not until the third component
of the sequence that we can fully distinguish between the R and the S. To confuse
the situation even more, the letter A is indicated by the two-symbol sequence of
( .- ), which is the sequence prefix for R.

               A .-    F ..-.     K -.-   P .--.   U ..-
               B -...  G --.      L .-..  Q --.-   V ...-
               C -.-.  H ....     M --    R .-.    W .--
               D -..   I ..       N -.    S ...    X -..-
               E .     J .---     O ---   T -      Y -.--      Z --..

To help decode a sequence, we can build a decision tree that models Morse Code.
The nodes represent the letters and symbols that are part of Morse Code and the
branches provide a selection of either a dot ( left branch ) or a dash ( right branch ).
The root node is empty and indicates the starting position when decoding a sequence.

