
The Set ADT is a common container used in computer science. But unlike the
Bag ADT introduced in Chapter 1, a set stores unique values and represents the
same structure found in mathematics. It is commonly used when you need to store
a collection of unique values without regard to how they are stored or when you
need to perform various mathematical set operations on collections

The Set Abstract Data Type

The definition of the set abstract data type is provided here, followed by
an implementation using a list. In later chapters, we will provide and evaluate alternate
implementations for the Set ADT.

A set is a container that stores a collection of unique values over a given comparable
domain in which the stored values have no particular ordering.

     Set(): Creates a new set initialized to the empty set.

     length (): Returns the number of elements in the set, also known as the
        cardinality. Accessed using the len() function.

     contains ( element ): Determines if the given value is an element of the set
        and returns the appropriate boolean value. Accessed using the in operator.

     add( element ): Modifies the set by adding the given value or element to the
        set if the element is not already a member. If the element is not unique, no
        action is taken and the operation is skipped.

     remove( element ): Removes the given value from the set if the value is contained
        in the set and raises an exception otherwise.
        
     equals ( setB ): Determines if the set is equal to another set and returns a
        boolean value. For two sets, A and B, to be equal, both A and B must contain
        the same number of elements and all elements in A must also be elements in
        B. If both sets are empty, the sets are equal. Access with == or !=.

     isSubsetOf( setB ): Determines if the set is a subset of another set and returns
        a boolean value. For set A to be a subset of B, all elements in A must
        also be elements in B.

     union( setB ): Creates and returns a new set that is the union of this set and
        setB. The new set created from the union of two sets, A and B, contains all
        elements in A plus those elements in B that are not in A. Neither set A nor
        set B is modified by this operation.

     intersect( setB ): Creates and returns a new set that is the intersection
        of this set and setB. The intersection of sets A and B contains only those
        elements that are in both A and B. Neither set A nor set B is modified by
        this operation.

     difference( setB ): Creates and returns a new set that is the difference of
        this set and setB. The set difference, A−B, contains only those elements that
        are in A but not in B. Neither set A nor set B is modified by this operation.

     iterator (): Creates and returns an iterator that can be used to iterate over
        the collection of items.



